
Course Number: 
Term/Year/Duration: Fall/2021/September - December
Course Title: The Humanist Engineer
 
Instructor Name: 	Troy David Ouellette, PhD
Email:	touellette@brocku.ca 
On-line Location:         Brock Sakai Website: https://lms.brocku.ca/portal/site 
Times and Locations: Every Tuesday of the Semester
As per the Brock University glossary, unless otherwise noted, this course does not require that you attend at a specific time, but will still have deadlines that you will need to adhere to. Make sure you set reminders for yourself to complete all course work on time! When looking at an asynchronous course, you may be wondering why it still has a specified time. This is to allow the instructor the option of using the time as office hours or a meet-time if needed. Instructors may or may not choose to use the time set. There may be some occasions where we may all need to meet through video conferencing or one-on-one at a designated time – this will be announced on the Sakai website and/or communicated through email. 
 
Course Calendar Description:

Lectures, studio work, 5 hours per week.
This course introduces the student to a wide range of artists, thinkers and concepts associated with art/techno/science collaboration. Topics from a historical point of view, will be covered and, will include topics such as: Environmental Engineering, Architecture and Interior Spaces, Present and Future Meta Materials and Civil Engineering.  Students will have the opportunity to write about each major theme in a final research project to better articulate their lines of inquiry and research, which will culminate in an exhibition of their group designs. 

Additional Description:
Organization of the Course 
Each of the four main “project sections” is augmented by presentations, which will introduce the main themes. These presentations are both historical and contemporary to give the student the ability to see how Art and Engineering have coexisted and complimented one another throughout the centuries.  All four major projects will conclude with a written rationale that will discuss research concepts, materials and process. The lecture component will complement the final project which will test the ability of students to work with one another and give them an opportunity to showcase their ideas in an on-line and physical exhibition. 

Course Learning Objectives 
The purpose of this course is to introduce the student to the creative cooperative potential by integrating various fields of study. Students will see a wide range examples and gain an understanding of the possibilities by using design and project development to convey a variety of subjects including: speculative ideas, projections or imaginative conjecture, Idea realization in prototype.

Course Prerequisites

Learning Objectives/Outcomes 
The specific learning objectives of the course will enable the student to: 
•	Conceptualize the subject/object/situation and articulate this using computer design and visualization techniques. 
•	Arrive at creative and compositional ideas through research and use drawing to solve problems and widen visual vocabulary so the student may speak articulately and critically about their work and the work of others. 
•	Develop an understanding of the role of 20th century and contemporary art in relation to engineering practices.

Course Communications:
Note: Sakai and Brock Email will be used for communication outside of class. Please check Sakai regularly to be notified of any cancellations or course updates. I will post videos and resources periodically. The reading lists and assignment updates will be included in the digital content. 
Evaluation Components and Due Dates

Evaluation Component	Grade Weight
Lab Write-ups (1 paragraph on the readings 10% with design problem assignments 10%	20%
Assignment #1 	20%
Assignment #2 	20%
Assignment #3 	20%
Assignment #4 	20%
Total	100%


Assignment #1 Essay on a Designer, Artist, Architect, Engineer, Technologist, Scientist as It Relates to the Field(s) of Engineering
This project deals with topics you are concerned about or subjects you find interesting and must include how their work relates to engineering or may have the potential to influence how we think about the fields of engineering.  

Assignment #2 New Materials and Technologies for Design
What will be explored in this project is the use of materials and techniques used throughout the ages beginning with the industrial revolution up to automation and artificial intelligence.

Assignment #3 Future City and Ecological Integration/Understanding
This project will investigate the utopian projects of the 20th C foregrounding architecture and transportation as it relates to comfort, sustainability, human connection, environmentalism.

Group Assignment #4 Speculative Welland Canal Redesign
We will speak to collaboration, group work, collectives and movements.
Environmental re-design, bridge design, waterways, recreation and walkways, economic considerations, parks, transportation, social and cultural potential. 

-	Identify a site – Is it represented in the historical record? How does it function now?
-	Design a project for that site
-	How might it link with environmental sustainability?
-	What are the complexities in the present that you would encounter from the design/structure?
-	What are the ramifications for the future? Examples: More social interactions, Create new spaces for plants and animals, Exist to enhance transportation
-	Is the project adaptable, flexible or even recyclable?


Grading Rubric

·	Critical thinking: application of conceptual and technical ideas
·	Virtuosity: development of composition, material application
·	Creativity: personal interpretation, inventiveness
·	Work habits: process, persistence, prepared attendance, finished assignments, dedication
·	Exploration: investigations, uniqueness and difference, experimentation
·	Participation: Research Papers and Final Project

Method of Instruction Evaluation/Grading Rubric
Each student will be evaluated on their ability to explore and apply the visual and thematic concepts of the course through class work, design assignments. Participation, which develops the ability to 'articulate' ideas and work habits is an essential part of the assessment. As a student I want you to ask yourself the following questions regarding your work…
·	Does the execution and materials, of each project, encompass the concept? 
·	How was critical thinking developed as it relates to conceptual exploration, course themes and ideas?
·	How surprising was the idea in terms of creativity: personal interpretation and inventiveness? 
·	Did I use my time wisely as it pertained to work habits: persistence, ambition?
·	Has the project been researched extensively by looking at the work of other architects, artists or engineers? 
·	Are assignments completed by the due dates with proper citations? 
·	Did I participate by using a focused approach to all activities?

Late Submission Policy:
The penalties for late submission of assigned coursework (e.g., papers, assignments, weekly reflections) are 2 marks per day, unless accommodations are required. See section on accommodations.

COMPASSIONATE MEDICAL ABSENCES:
If you require academic consideration because of an incapacitating medical condition, please inform your instructor(s), as soon as possible, of your inability to complete your work.  Given our challenging times related to COVID-19, requests for extensions on assignments due to illness or caring for others with illness will be given case by case consideration for extensions.  If you are unable to write a scheduled examination due to an incapacitating medical condition, you must follow the process set out in the Faculty Handbook III:9.4.1.

Relationship between attendance and grades: Students are expected to attend all online classes and must submit all assignments in order to pass this course. 
Important dates: (check the section on sessional or important dates in the relevant online University calendar at http://brocku.ca/webcal/) or here… https://brocku.ca/important-dates/#fall-winter

Academic Policies

Academic Integrity:
Statement for undergraduate courses
Academic misconduct is a serious offence. The principle of academic integrity, particularly of doing one’s own work, documenting properly (including use of quotation marks, appropriate paraphrasing and referencing/citation), collaborating appropriately, and avoiding misrepresentation, is a core principle in university study. Students should consult Section VII, “Academic Misconduct”, in the “Academic Regulations and University Policies” entry in the Undergraduate Calendar, available at http://brocku.ca/webcal to view a fuller description of prohibited actions, and the procedures and penalties. Information on what constitutes academic integrity is available at https://brocku.ca/academic-integrity/ 

Plagiarism software:
If plagiarism software is used (Turnitin.com), a statement to that effect must be included on the outline including an option to opt out. Sample statement regarding Turnitin.com
This course may use Turnitin.com, phrase-matching software. If you object to uploading your assignments to Turnitin.com for any reason, please notify the instructor to discuss alternative submissions.

Intellectual Property Notice:	
All slides, presentations, handouts, tests, exams, and other course materials created by the instructor in this course are the intellectual property of the instructor. A student who publicly posts or sells an instructor’s work, without the instructor’s express consent, may be charged with misconduct under Brock’s Academic Integrity Policy and/or Code of Conduct, and may also face adverse legal consequences for infringement of intellectual property rights.

Special Accommodation:
The University is committed to fostering an inclusive and supportive environment for all students and will adhere to the Human Rights principles that ensure respect for dignity, individualized accommodation, inclusion and full participation. The University provides a wide range of resources to assist students, as follows: 

a) If you require academic accommodation because of a disability or an ongoing health or mental health condition, please contact Student Accessibility Services at askSAS@brocku.ca or 905 688 5550 ext. 3240. 

b) If you require academic accommodation because of an incapacitating medical condition, you must, as soon as practicable, inform your instructor(s) of your inability to complete your academic work. You must also submit a Brock University Student Medical Certificate (found at https://brocku.ca/registrar/toolkit/forms). The University may, at its discretion, request more detailed documentation in certain cases. If you are unable to write a scheduled examination due to an incapacitating medical condition, you must follow the process set out in the Faculty Handbook III:9.4.1. 

c) If you are experiencing mental health concerns, contact the Student Wellness and Accessibility Centre. Good2Talk is a service specifically for post-secondary students, available 24/7, 365 days a year, and provides anonymous assistance: http://www.good2talk.ca/ or call 1-866-925-5454. For information on wellness, coping and resiliency, visit: https://brocku.ca/mental-health/

d) If you require academic accommodation on religious grounds, you should make a formal, written request to your instructor(s) for alternative dates and/or means of satisfying requirements. Such requests should be made during the first two weeks of any given academic term, or as soon as possible after a need for accommodation is known to exist. 

e) If you have been affected by sexual violence, the Human Rights & Equity Office offers support, information, reasonable accommodations, and resources through the Sexual Violence Support & Education Coordinator. For information on sexual violence, visit Brock's Sexual Assault and Harassment Policy or contact the Sexual Violence Support & Response Coordinator at humanrights@brocku.ca or 905 688 5550 ext. 4387. 

f) If you feel you have experienced discrimination or harassment on any of the above grounds, including racial, gender or other forms of discrimination, contact the Human Rights and Equity Office at humanrights@brocku.ca. 

